---
layout: reveal
title: "7. Martyrs/East & West"
author: "Nathan Gibson"
tags: [7,slides]
image: pebble-beach.jpg
parallaxBackgroundImage: 'assets/img/pebble-beach.jpg'
---

# Entangled Stories 

### The History of Jewish-Christian-Muslim Relations in the Premodern Near East

### 7. Martyrs/East & West

Winter Semester 2023  
Prof. Dr. Nathan Gibson

## Review: Parting of the Ways

- The early Jesus movement as a Jewish movement (Jesus, baptism, Peter, Paul) -- but for how long?
- "New Covenant" or "New Testament" as a framework for relating the teachings and actions of Jesus as Messiah to the commandments of Torah
- Problematic sources (history by the winners)

## Review: Parting of the Ways

- Theses of a Long Parting of the Ways
  - **Scripture**: Many New Testament writings can be understood *within* the framework of 1st-century CE Jewish thought.
  - **Authority**
  - **Lived Religion**

## Review: Parting of the Ways

  - **Authority**: The theological disputes of the first centuries reflect not two camps ("Christian" vs. "Jewish") but many more.
    - Disputes included accusations (in both directions?)
    - Debated but ultimately kept: Tanakh/Old Testament, belief in YHWH God of Israel

## Review: Parting of the Ways

  - **Authority**: The theological disputes of the first centuries reflect not two camps ("Christian" vs. "Jewish") but many more.
    - Received and re-signified as New Covenant rituals: Mikveh (cleansing) -> baptism, Passover -> communion & Passion Week
    - Debated and ultimately recast as non-obligatory (or even harmful) practices in the New Covenant: circumcision, purity laws (food & washing), Sabbath observance

## Review: Parting of the Ways
  - **Lived Religion**: The attempts by religious leaders to draw boundaries between communities show what normal people were *actually* doing.
    - Trying to separate observance of festivals (Passover vs. Easter)
    - Trying to regulate family law (preventing intermarriage)

## Learning Objectives

1. Describe what martyrs contributed to the ideology of late antique religion.
2. Give some examples of political, cultural, and religious differences between eastern and western Christian and Jewish communities.

## Introduction

Reflect: If you were willing to die for someone or something, who or what would it be?
{: .fragment}

If a friend or family member were killed for an act of civil disobedience, how would that impact you?
{: .fragment}

## Martyrdom

<https://etherpad.studiumdigitale.uni-frankfurt.de/p/23entangled7>

- _Who_ exactly was being killed?
- _What_ were they being killed for?

## Martyrdom

- The meaning of _martyr_
- The nature of the Roman persecutions
- The precedence of civil disobedience

> Tertullian: "The blood of the martyrs is the seed of the church." (or churches?)

## Martyrdom

- An ideology of suffering
  - Jesus and apostles as models
  - Transcending class & gender

## Spirituality and Leadership in Late Antiquity

- "late antiquity"
- anchoritic monasticism (Anthony the Great, 251 – 356)
- cenobitic monasticism (Pachomius, 4th cent.)

## Christianity and the Roman Empire

- Constantine, Edict of Milan (313) permitting Christianity
- Councils of Nicea (325) and Constantinople (381) on Arianism and other matters
- Theodosius I, Edict of Thessalonica (380) making Christianity state religion

## Christianity and the Roman Empire

- Council of Ephesus (431) on Nestorianism (Christotokos/Theotokos)
- Council of Chalcedon (451) on natures of Christ

## East and West

... meanwhile in Persia

{% include img-row.html images='assets/img/Roman_Empire_Trajan_117AD.png' %}

<figcaption>By &lt;a href=&quot;//commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Tataryn&quot; title=&quot;User:Tataryn&quot;&gt;Tataryn&lt;/a&gt; - &lt;span class=&quot;int-own-work&quot; lang=&quot;en&quot;&gt;Own work&lt;/span&gt;, <a href="https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0" title="Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0">CC BY-SA 3.0</a>, <a href="https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=19625326">Link</a></figcaption>

## East and West

Dura Europos <http://media.artgallery.yale.edu/duraeuropos/dura.html>

## East and West

Syriac, Armenian, Coptic, Ethiopic churches

## East and West

- doctrine
- politics
  - frontier regions
  - religious policies
- language & culture
  - Latin & Greek vs. Aramaic, Coptic etc.

## Preview

Rabbis