---
layout: reveal
title: "2. Monotheism"
author: "Nathan Gibson"
tags: [2,slides]
image: stars.jpg
parallaxBackgroundImage: 'assets/img/stars.jpg'
---

# Entangled Stories  
{: .r-fit-text}

### The History of Jewish-Christian-Muslim Relations in the Premodern Near East
{: .r-fit-text}

### 2. The Rise of Monotheism

Winter Semester 2023  
Prof. Dr. Nathan Gibson

## Review

Last objectives: 
- <i class="fa-solid fa-check"></i> Get oriented to the way this course works.  
- <i class="fa-solid fa-check"></i> Explain why the story of each Abrahamic faith cannot be understood without the others.

## Review

Office: IG-Farben-Haus 6.552  
Consultation hours:  
- Monday 14:00-15:00 (no appointment, just come by)
- Monday 15:00-16:00 (with appointment, book at <http://npgibson.com/m/sprechstunden>)
- Friday 13:000-14:00 (Zoom appointment, book at <http://npgibson.com/m/sprechstunden-zoom>)

## Review

- "Tangled" exercise
- Historical sources: literary & documentary texts
- Historical arguments: possible, plausible, probable, provable (mind the gaps)

## Review

Why can't we understand the story of one Abrahamic religion without the others?

## Review

Common denominator *not* Judaism *but rather* ancient Israelite religion in the form conveyed in the Bible/Tanakh.

## Monotheism

### Shema

> Hear, O Israel: YHWH is our God, YHWH is one ...  
> שְׁמַע יִשְׂרָאֵל יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ יְהוָה אֶחָֽד

{% include img-row.html images='./assets/img/shema.jpg' %}

## Monotheism

### Meanwhile the Canaanites

{% include img-row.html images='./assets/img/baal-stele.jpg' %}

<figcaption>15th-century BCE stele of Baal (Louvre, accession no. AO 15775). By &lt;a href=&quot;//commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Mbzt&quot; title=&quot;User:Mbzt&quot;&gt;Mbzt&lt;/a&gt; - &lt;span class=&quot;int-own-work&quot; lang=&quot;en&quot;&gt;Own work&lt;/span&gt;, <a href="https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0" title="Creative Commons Attribution 3.0">CC BY 3.0</a>, <a href="https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=18192376">Link</a></figcaption>

## Monotheism

### Nicene Creed

> We believe in one God, the Father Almighty, Maker of all things visible and invisible ...

{% include img-row.html images='./assets/img/nicene-creed.jpg' %}

## Monotheism

### Meanwhile the Romans

{% include img-row.html images='./assets/img/dionysius.jpg' %}

<figcaption>"Part of a panel from a mosaic pavement: the god of wine Dionysos dances with a panter, from a Roman villa at Halicarnassus, 4th century AD, British Museum." By &lt;a rel=&quot;nofollow&quot; class=&quot;external text&quot; href=&quot;https://www.flickr.com/people/41523983@N08&quot;&gt;Carole Raddato&lt;/a&gt; from FRANKFURT, Germany - &lt;a rel=&quot;nofollow&quot; class=&quot;external text&quot; href=&quot;https://www.flickr.com/photos/carolemage/16973166913/&quot;&gt;Part of a panel from a mosaic pavement: the god of wine Dionysos dances with a panter, from a Roman villa at Halicarnassus, 4th century AD, British Museum&lt;/a&gt;, <a href="https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/2.0" title="Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 2.0">CC BY-SA 2.0</a>, <a href="https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=45907170">Link</a></figcaption>


## Monotheism

### Shahada

> I testify that there is no god but God ...
> أشْهَدُ أنْ لا الهَ الاّ الله

{% include img-row.html images='./assets/img/abbasid-dinar.jpg' %}

<figcaption>By DrFO.Jr.Tn - Own work, CC BY 3.0, https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=9911402</figcaption>

## Monotheism

### While somewhat earlier the Arabians ... 

{% include img-row.html images='./assets/img/talab-inscription.jpg' %}

<figcaption>"Slab, building inscription of a temple, ancient South Arabian script, dedicated to god Talab. Limestone. From Yemen, 3rd century CE. Ancient Orient Museum, Istanbul, Turkey." By &lt;a href=&quot;//commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Neuroforever&quot; title=&quot;User:Neuroforever&quot;&gt;Osama Shukir Muhammed Amin FRCP(Glasg)&lt;/a&gt; - &lt;span class=&quot;int-own-work&quot; lang=&quot;en&quot;&gt;Own work&lt;/span&gt;, <a href="https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0" title="Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 4.0">CC BY-SA 4.0</a>, <a href="https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=99092239">Link</a></figcaption>


## The mystery

Monotheism in a polytheistic world: Where did it come from?

## Learning objective

<i class="fa-solid fa-check"></i> Describe how Abraham became a father of faith to Judaism, Christianity, and Islam.

## Initial Reactions

Why did Abraham became a father of faith to Judaism, Christianity, and Islam?

## Abraham in Genesis

> Genesis 12:1,7: Now YHWH said to Abram, “Go from your country and your kindred and your father’s house to the land that I will show you."  

> Then YHWH appeared to Abram and said, “To your offspring I will give this land.” So he built there an altar to YHWH, who had appeared to him.

> (Genesis 12:1,7, ESV, names of God reflect Hebrew)

## Abraham in Genesis

> Genesis 14:18-19: And Melchizedek king of Salem brought out bread and wine. (He was priest of El ʿElyon.) And he blessed him and said, “Blessed be Abram by El ʿElyon, Possessor of heaven and earth..." 

> Genesis 14:22-23: But Abram said to the king of Sodom, “I have lifted my hand to YHWH, El ʿElyon, Possessor of heaven and earth,  I would not take a thread or a sandal strap or anything that is yours, lest you should say, ‘I have made Abram rich.’

## Abraham in Genesis

> Genesis 16:13, 15: So she called the name of YHWH who spoke to her, “You are El-Roi,” for she said, “Truly here I have seen him who looks after me.” ... And Hagar bore Abram a son, and Abram called the name of his son, whom Hagar bore, Ishmael.

## Abraham in Genesis

> Genesis 17:1-3: When Abram was ninety-nine years old YHWH appeared to Abram and said to him, “I am El-Shaddai; walk before me, and be blameless,  that I may make my covenant between me and you, and may multiply you greatly.” Then Abram fell on his face. And Elohim said to him ...

## Names of God 

## Types of monotheism

- philosophical monotheism
- inclusive monotheism
- practical monotheism (monolatry/henotheism)
- ethical monotheism

## Monotheism: A rare find in a polytheistic world

- Mesopotamian religion
- Canaanite religion
- Egyptian religion

## Monotheism: A rare find in a polytheistic world

- Ancient Egypt: Amenhotep IV (Echnaton), otherwise monolatry/henotheism
- Ancient Greece: philosophical and/or inclusive monotheism
- Zoroastrianism
- African religions, esp. Nour

## Pre-exilic Israelite Religion

- "Yahweh", "El", "Elohim"
- Creation account
- Archeology
- Theophoric names
- Covenant making
- Weather

## Pre-exilic Israelite Religion

{% include img-row.html images='./assets/img/taanach-cult-stand.jpg' %}

<figcaption>Taanach cult stand. By &lt;a href=&quot;//commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?title=User:Oncenawhile&amp;amp;action=edit&amp;amp;redlink=1&quot; class=&quot;new&quot; title=&quot;User:Oncenawhile (page does not exist)&quot;&gt;oncenawhile&lt;/a&gt; - &lt;a href=&quot;https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/en:Istanbul_Archaeology_Museums&quot; class=&quot;extiw&quot; title=&quot;w:en:Istanbul Archaeology Museums&quot;&gt;&lt;span title=&quot;archaeology museum in Istanbul, Turkey&quot;&gt;Istanbul Archaeology Museums&lt;/span&gt;&lt;/a&gt;, <a href="http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/deed.en" title="Creative Commons Zero, Public Domain Dedication">CC0</a>, <a href="https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=34520819">Link</a></figcaption>

## Exilic Israelite Religion

## Post-exilic Israelite Religion

## Second-Temple Judaism and the Jesus Movement 

## Rabbinic Judaism

## Pre-Islamic Religion, Quran

## Attempts to explain monotheism

- original monotheism
- evolution
- psychoanalysis (Freud)
- social benefit (Durkheim)
- revolution

## Second Try

Why did Abraham became a father of faith to Judaism, Christianity, and Islam?

## Preview

Scripture & Prophets