---
layout: reveal
title: "6. Parting of the Ways"
author: "Nathan Gibson"
tags: [6,slides]
image: stone.jpg
parallaxBackgroundImage: 'assets/img/stone.jpg'
---

# Entangled Stories 

### The History of Jewish-Christian-Muslim Relations in the Premodern Near East

### 6. Parting of the Ways

Winter Semester 2023  
Prof. Dr. Nathan Gibson

## Theses of a Long Parting of the Ways

1. **Scripture**: Many New Testament writings can be understood *within* the framework of 1st-century CE Jewish thought.
2. **Authority**: The theological disputes of the first centuries reflect not two camps ("Christian" vs. "Jewish") but many more.
3. **Lived Religion**: The attempts by religious leaders to draw boundaries between communities show what normal people were *actually* doing.
{: .r-fit-text}

## Review

- Last Objective: <i class="fa-solid fa-check"></i> Relate the early Jesus movement to Messianic ideas in Second-Temple Judaism. 
- Meaning of "Messiah"
- Covenants in Tanakh (Abrahamic, Mosaic, Davidic)

## Review

- Overview of Second-Temple-period events 
  - Return from exile, rebuilding of temple (mid 6th-5th cent.)
  - Alexander the Great's conquest of Palestine, 332 BCE
  - Antiochus IV Epiphanes (175-164 BCE) and the Maccabean uprising
  - Semi-autonomous Jewish rule of Judea by Hasmonean priests, ca. 140-66 BCE
  - Herod the Great's reign, 37-4 BCE
  - Reign of various Herods and Roman governors/procurators, 4 BCE-66 CE
  - Jewish revolt and Roman descruction of temple, 66-70 CE
  - Bar Kochba revolt 132-135 CE
{: .r-fit-text}

## Review

- Covenant and Messianic Expectations
- Political and Religious Responses (Herodians, Sadducees, Pharisees, "Zealots")
- Messiah in Tanakh
  - Anointing of kings, priests, and prophets
  - Recurring mentions of David and his throne
- Different Messianic views, e.g. Messiah son of David, Messiah son of Joseph/Ephraim
- The Jesus movement and Jesus's statements in Gospel accounts: Greco-Roman or Jewish?
{: .r-fit-text}

## Sources

- New Testament
- Patristic writings (Church Fathers)
- Rabbinic sources (Mishnah, Talmud, etc.)

Problems?

## The Early Jesus Movement

- Baptism
- Peter
- Paul 

## Covenant as Framework

> Matthew 5:17-20 (ESV): “Do not think that I have come to abolish the Law or the Prophets; I have not come to abolish them but to fulfill them. 18 For truly, I say to you, until heaven and earth pass away, not an iota, not a dot, will pass from the Law until all is accomplished. 19 Therefore whoever relaxes one of the least of these commandments and teaches others to do the same will be called least in the kingdom of heaven, but whoever does them and teaches them will be called great in the kingdom of heaven. 20 For I tell you, unless your righteousness exceeds that of the scribes and Pharisees, you will never enter the kingdom of heaven.
{: .r-fit-text}

## Covenant as Framework

> Matthew 26:27-28 (ESV): And he took a cup, and when he had given thanks he gave it to them, saying, “Drink of it, all of you, 28 for this is my blood of the covenant, which is poured out for many for the forgiveness of sins.
{: .r-fit-text}

## Covenant as Framework

> Jeremiah 31:31 (ESV): Behold, the days are coming, declares the LORD, when I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel and the house of Judah ...
{: .r-fit-text}

- "Old" and "New" Testaments
- Relationship of Quran to previous scriptures

## A New Religion?


## Accusations

Gospel accounts regarding 
- Jesus's crucifixion
- destruction of the Temple

> Luke 19:41-44 (ESV): 41 And when he drew near and saw the city, he wept over it, 42 saying, “Would that you, even you, had known on this day the things that make for peace! But now they are hidden from your eyes. 43 For the days will come upon you, when your enemies will set up a barricade around you and surround you and hem you in on every side 44 and tear you down to the ground, you and your children within you. And they will not leave one stone upon another in you, because you did not know the time of your visitation.” 
{: .r-fit-text}

## Accusations

> Birkat ha-Minim (curse of the heretics) (Marcus 2009):  For those doomed to destruction may there be no hope  
and may the dominion of arrogance be quickly uprooted in our days  
and may the Nazarenes and the heretics be destroyed in a moment  
and may they be blotted out of the book of life  
and may they not be inscribed with the righteous.  
Blessed are you, O Lord,  
who subdues the arrogant.
{: .r-fit-text}

## Accusations

> Justin Martyr, *Trypho* 16 (Kirby, http://www.earlychristianwritings.com/text/justinmartyr-dialoguetrypho.html): For none of you, I suppose, will venture to say that God neither did nor does foresee the events, which are future, nor fore-ordained his deserts for each one. Accordingly, these things have happened to you in fairness and justice, for you have slain the Just One, and His prophets before Him; and now you reject those who hope in Him, and in Him who sent Him--God the Almighty and Maker of all things--cursing in your synagogues those that believe on Christ. 
{: .r-fit-text}

## Testing Thesis 2

**Authority**: The theological disputes of the first centuries reflect not two camps ("Christian" vs. "Jewish") but many more.

## Testing Thesis 3

**Lived Religion**: The attempts by religious leaders to draw boundaries between communities show what normal people were *actually* doing.

## Summary

## Preview

Martyrs/East & West