---
layout: reveal
title: "5. Messiah & Covenant"
author: "Nathan Gibson"
tags: [5,slides]
image: palm.jpg
parallaxBackgroundImage: 'assets/img/palm.jpg'
---

# Entangled Stories 

### The History of Jewish-Christian-Muslim Relations in the Premodern Near East

### 5. Messiah & Covenant

Winter Semester 2023  
Prof. Dr. Nathan Gibson

## Review

- Discussion: Which would you argue for as scripture (if you had to)?
  - universality
  - accuracy
- A Brief History of Scripture
  - Earliest manuscripts
  - Written vs. Oral
  - Historical sources about views of scripture 

## Review
  - Historical sources about views of scripture, including intertextuality (references in the Bible and Quran to other scriptural passages)
    - Second-temple Judaism
    - Early Christianity
    - Early Islam
- Differing modes of revelation

## Review

- How did Scripture become Scripture? (supplement)
  - "Canonization" ("canon" as "list")
  - being read in church or "defiling the hands" (Mishnah Yadayim 3.5)
  - retrospective criteria, e.g. "apostolic"
  - technology of writing
  - Some texts oral, then written

## Review

- The Concept of Scripture among Jews, Christians, and Muslims
  - How was it revealed?
  - Which is primary, written or oral? 
  - What role do language and translation play?
  - How does one determine what is or isn't scripture?
  - How should one interpret scripture?

## Relevance

2 ways: 
- the concept of Messiah/Christ in the 3 religions
- The relationship of NT > OT, Quran > Bible (covenant concept)

## Learning Objective

<i class="fa-solid fa-check"></i> Relate the early Jesus movement to Messianic ideas in Second-Temple Judaism.

## Intro

What do you think of when you hear the word ...  
- "Messiah"?  
{: .fragment}
- "anointed"?  
{: .fragment}
- "Christ"?  
{: .fragment}

## Covenants in Tanakh

- Abrahamic
- Mosaic
- Davidic

## Second-Temple Period Sources

- Maccabees and other "intertestamental" Jewish literature preserved in Greek
- Josephus
- Dead Sea Scrolls
- Mishnah
- New Testament
- Inscriptions

## Second-Temple Period

<https://etherpad.studiumdigitale.uni-frankfurt.de/p/23entangled5>


## Covenant and Messianic Expectations

## Political and Religious Responses

## Background in Tanakh

Kings

> 1 Samuel 10:1 (ESV): Then Samuel took a flask of oil and poured it on his head and kissed him and said, “Has not the LORD anointed you to be prince over his people Israel?
{: .r-fit-text}

> 1 Samuel 16:13 (ESV): Then Samuel took the horn of oil and anointed him in the midst of his brothers.
{: .r-fit-text}

## Background in Tanakh

High Priests

> Exodus 40:13–15 (ESV): and put on Aaron the holy garments. And you shall anoint him and consecrate him, that he may serve me as priest. 14 You shall bring his sons also and put coats on them, 15 and anoint them, as you anointed their father, that they may serve me as priests. And their anointing shall admit them to a perpetual priesthood throughout their generations.
{: .r-fit-text}

## Background in Tanakh

Prophets

> 1 Kings 19:16 (ESV): And Jehu the son of Nimshi you shall anoint to be king over Israel, and Elisha the son of Shaphat of Abel-meholah you shall anoint to be prophet in your place. 
{: .r-fit-text}

## Background in Tanakh

Recurring mentions of David and his throne

> Isaiah 9:2,4,6-7 (ESV): The people who walked in darkness have seen a great light; those who dwelt in a land of deep darkness, on them has light shone ... 4 For the yoke of his burden, and the staff for his shoulder, the rod of his oppressor, you have broken as on the day of Midian. ... 6 For to us a child is born, to us a son is given; and the government shall be upon his shoulder, and his name shall be called Wonderful Counselor, Mighty God, Everlasting Father, Prince of Peace. 7 Of the increase of his government and of peace there will be no end, on the throne of David and over his kingdom, to establish it and to uphold it with justice and with righteousness from this time forth and forevermore.
{: .r-fit-text}

## Different Messianic views

<https://etherpad.studiumdigitale.uni-frankfurt.de/p/23entangled5>

## Different Messianic views

Gabriel's Vision

{% include img-row.html images='assets/img/gabriels-vision.jpg' %}

<figcaption>By Unknown author - &lt;a rel=&quot;nofollow&quot; class=&quot;external text&quot; href=&quot;https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/middleeast/israel/10034147/Second-Gabriel-Stone-may-exist-says-scholar.html&quot;&gt;The Telegraph&lt;/a&gt;, Public Domain, <a href="https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=47723129">Link</a></figcaption>

## Different Messianic views

How many Messiahs?  
- zero (Messianic Age)?
- Messiah son of David?
- + Messiah son of Joseph (=son of Ephraim)? 
- multiple? 

## The Jesus Movement

Jewish or Greco-Roman?

>  This discussion has been interested primarily in the question how people who subscribed to the Jewish understanding of monotheism nonetheless came to worship Jesus in addition to the Father. A hundred years ago, Wilhelm Bousset had avoided this problem by suggesting that the worship of Jesus arose un- der Gentile, pagan influences. This suggestion has been widely rejected in recent times. The language used with reference to Jesus (Christ, Son of Man, Son of God, and so on) has a rich background in Judaism and suggests that Jesus was understood initially in Jewish rather than in Gentile categories. (John Collins, 2011)
{: .r-fit-text}

## Preview

"Parting of the Ways"