---
layout: reveal
title: "10. A New Community"
author: "Nathan Gibson"
tags: [10,slides]
image: dome-of-the-rock.jpg
parallaxBackgroundImage: 'assets/img/dome-of-the-rock-edge.jpg'
---

# Entangled Stories 

### The History of Jewish-Christian-Muslim Relations in the Premodern Near East

### 10. A New Community

Winter Semester 2023  
Prof. Dr. Nathan Gibson

## Course Review

A little game to jog your memory ...

<!-- https://jeopardylabs.com/play/entangled-stories -->

## Review - Feedback

## Review: A New Prophet

- <i class="fa-solid fa-check"></i> Previous Objective: Outline some of the ways the Quran engages with Judaism and Christianity, and assess the historical basis for these features.

## Review: A New Prophet

- Historical Sources: Quran, "Constitution" of Medina, Arabian inscriptions, Arabic poetry, (later) Islamic traditions, (farther away) texts in Syriac, Greek, etc.
- What is the Quran? Arabic language, oral "recitation," *sura*s (chapters) arranged longest to shortest (not chronological), more uniform in genre/discourse types than Bible 

## Review: A New Prophet

- What does the Quran say about itself?
  - a recitation
  - guidance
  - revelation
- What does the Quran say about Muhammad?
  - very little biographical material
  - prophetic template

## Review: A New Prophet

- Jews & Christians in the Quran
  - called "Scripture People" (or "People of the Book")
  - invited to acknowledge the revelation Muhammad brings
  - criticized for 
    - false beliefs (especially God having children)
    - disputes
    - false worship & unfaithfulness

## Review: A New Prophet

- Bible in the Quran
  - stories of prophets
  - reference to previous scriptures and instructions/laws
  - not usually direct citations

## Today's Objective

<i class="fa-solid fa-check"></i> For the formation of the early Islamic community, identify which aspects can be traced and which ones remain open questions.

## Outline

1. Introduction: The Ingredients of Community
2. The Early Years (Muhammad's Lifetime)
3. The First Caliphs
4. The Umayyad Caliphs

## Introduction: The Ingredients of Community

What does it take to create a new community?

## Introduction: The Ingredients of Community

Establishing group identity through 
- recognizing characteristics held in common, 
- creating shared experiences, 
- and distinguishing the group from others.

## Introduction: The Ingredients of Community

- common characteristics vs. distinctions, e.g.
  - language
  - ethnicity
  - beliefs

## Introduction: The Ingredients of Community

- shared experiences, e.g.
  - leadership
  - spaces
  - events
  - crises

## The Early Years (Muhammad's Lifetime)

## The Early Years: Constitution of Medina


## The Early Years: Jews & Christians in the Quran

- Jews & Christians in the Quran (primarily from *sura*s 2, 4, 5, and 9)
  - are called "Scripture People" (or "People of the Book"). Their prophets and scriptures are acknowledged as bringing God's revelation
  - are called to acknowledge Muhammad and the revelation he brings (5:15)
    - but want Muhammad (?) or Muslims (?) to follow their religion (2:120, 2:135)
    - demand signs from Muhammad (4:153)

## The Early Years: Jews & Christians in the Quran

  - Jews & Christians in the Quran are criticized for false beliefs
    - Christians claiming God has adopted or begotten a son (2:116, 9:30)
    - Christians claiming God is the Messiah son of Mary (5:17)
    - Jews and Christians claiming to be God's children (5:18)
    - Jews claiming Ezra is the son of God (9:30)

## The Early Years: Jews & Christians in the Quran

  - Jews & Christians in the Quran are criticized for their disputes (between Christians and Jews, 2:113, and among Christians, 5:14)
  - are criticized for their false worship and unfaithfulness in history and the present
    - Jews and Christians for taking their religious leaders as lords besides God (9:31)
    - (Israelites?) for breaking God's covenant, slandering Mary, and claiming to have killed Jesus (4:154-157, 5:12-13)

## The Early Years: Jews & Christians in the Quran

- Jews & Christians in the Quran (false worship & unfaithfulness cont.)
    - Christians for breaking God's covenant, distorting the words of Scripture, and being deceitful (5:13, but Muhammad is told to forgive them)
    - Christians for (apparently) worshiping Jesus and his mother as gods (5:116)
    - Jewish and Christian religious leaders for unjustly taking the people's wealth (9:34)

## The First Caliphs



## The Umayyad Caliphs




## 3. Quran's Origins

{% include img-row.html images='assets/img/kennedy-arabia-hijra.jpg' fit='contain' %}

<figcaption>Kennedy, Hugh, “Arabia in the Time of the Ḥijra (622 A.D.)”, in: Historical Atlas of Islam, Edited by: Hugh Kennedy. Consulted online on 18 December 2023 <http://dx.doi.org./10.1163/1573-3912_hai_HAI_16B></figcaption>

## 3. Quran's Origins: Two Extremes

- Quran in a vacuum
  - Variant 1: Revelation as a break from the old
  - Variant 2: Muhammad as an exceptional individual
- Quran as derivative

## 3. Quran's Origins: Birmingham Fragment

Radiocarbon dating: 568-645 (95.4%)

{% include img-row.html images='assets/img/birmingham-quran.jpg' %}

<figcaption>By &lt;span lang=&quot;en&quot;&gt;Anonymous&lt;/span&gt; - &lt;a rel=&quot;nofollow&quot; class=&quot;external text&quot; href=&quot;https://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/23/world/europe/quran-fragments-university-birmingham.html?_r=0&quot;&gt;The New York Times.&lt;/a&gt;, Public Domain, <a href="https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=41768466">Link</a></figcaption>

## 3. Quran's Origins: Sanaa Fragments

Radiocarbon dating: 578-669 (95%)

{% include img-row.html images='assets/img/sanaa-quran.jpg' %}

<figcaption>By Unknown. The original uploader was &lt;a href=&quot;https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Prima_meditationes&quot; class=&quot;extiw&quot; title=&quot;wikipedia:User:Prima meditationes&quot;&gt;Prima meditationes&lt;/a&gt; at &lt;a href=&quot;https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/&quot; class=&quot;extiw&quot; title=&quot;wikipedia:&quot;&gt;English Wikipedia&lt;/a&gt;., 13 November 2014 (original upload date) - &lt;a rel=&quot;nofollow&quot; class=&quot;external text&quot; href=&quot;http://ssrl.slac.stanford.edu/quranleaf/&quot;&gt;Stanford University&lt;/a&gt;, Public Domain, <a href="https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=37028036">Link</a></figcaption>

## 3. Significance of Quran's Origins

What impact does the Quran's statements about Jews and Christians and its use of biblical material have?

- Quran as revelation in a vacuum: no engagement necessary. What the Quran says is simply fact from an Islamic perspective, no matter how much Jews and Christians might protest.
- Muhammad as an exceptional individual: Focus on the biography of Muhammad and what he himself knew and thought.

## 3. Significance of Quran's Origins

- Quran as derivative: The Quran's statements about Jews and Christians are secondary and only partially informed or misinformed, hindering further understanding until today.

## 4. A Middle View

A middle view: Quran in dialogue

## 4. A Middle View

{% include img-row.html images='assets/img/kennedy-arabia-hijra.jpg' fit='contain' %}

<figcaption>Kennedy, Hugh, “Arabia in the Time of the Ḥijra (622 A.D.)”, in: Historical Atlas of Islam, Edited by: Hugh Kennedy. Consulted online on 18 December 2023 <http://dx.doi.org./10.1163/1573-3912_hai_HAI_16B></figcaption>

## 4. A Middle View: Sources in Perspective

- Quran
- "Constitution" of Medina
- Arabian inscriptions
- Arabic poetry
- (Later) Islamic traditions
- (Farther away) Texts in Syriac, Greek, etc.

## 4. A Middle View

What impact does the Quran's statements about Jews and Christians and its use of biblical material have?

- Quran in dialogue: The Quran's statements about Jews and Christians are meant to critique their positions. They model a conversational posture for Muslims rather than a set of dogmas they must believe about non-Muslims.



## Preview

A New Community