---
layout: reveal
title: "4. Working with Text: Mark it down and Mark it up (HTML and XML)"
author: "Nathan Gibson"
session: 4
tags: [4,slides]
image: breakdance.jpg
parallaxBackgroundImage: 'assets/img/breakdance.jpg'
---

# Working with Digital Data

### in Religious Studies

### 4. Working with Text: Mark it down and Mark it up (HTML and XML)

Summer Semester 2024  
Prof. Dr. Nathan Gibson

## Outline

1. Hands-on Review: Git
3. Group Work/Q&A: Your Datasets  
--_Break_--
4. Markdown & Markup

## 📈 Review

Last objective: Be able to use basic features of git to track changes to your data.

## 📈 Review: Why Git?

- Git keeps track of **_every change_** you or others make to your data.
{: .fragment}
- You can create _**different versions**_ (branches) of your project where you test new things, without risking breaking the whole project.
{: .fragment}
- You have **_full control_** over when and how these changes become part of the rest of the project.
{: .fragment}
- You can identify each release of your project with a **_version number_** and timestamp.
{: .fragment}
- Git is the standard for software development. Github alone is used by over 100 million developers.
{: .fragment}

## 📈 Review: Git Assignment

Tutorial at <https://24data.pages.gwdg.de/4>.

1. Getting started (installing Github Desktop and cloning the "Recipes" project)
2. Syncing and editing files (creating a new branch, editing a file, and publishing your branch with changes)
3. Setting up an account in Gitlab GWDG
4. Creating a merge request

## Group Work/Q&A: Your Datasets

- In groups: What dataset(s) are you thinking about using? What format(s) are the data in (text, tables, web pages, images, video, etc.)?
- Q&A: What questions do you have for me about deciding on a dataset?

## Break


## 🧭 Today's Learning Objective

Be able to add formatting or structure to your text with markdown and markup (HTML and XML).

## What is markdown?

- A simple way of adding formatting to plain text.
{: .fragment}
- Formatting might be **bold**, _italics_, bullet points, numbered lists, even tables or images.
{: .fragment}

## How does markdown work? 

- You use special characters such as `*`, `_`, `#`, `-` to add things to the text.
{: .fragment}
- E.g., you can make a `word` bold like this `**word**`.
{: .fragment}
- You can _write or edit_ markdown in any text editor, but to see the formatting you have to export it (e.g., as a web page, Word, or PDF) or use editors that support it (like VS Code or Zettlr).
{: .fragment}

## Markdown vs. other types of formatting

- Word (.doc or .docx)
- PDF
- RTF (Rich Text Formatting)

## Markdown vs. other types of formatting

- open (doesn't require a specific program)
- easily readable/editable (uses simple structure and characters)
- can be handled as plain text

## Where can you use markdown?

- blogging, web apps, even WhatsApp!

## What is markup?

- Markup adds formatting _or_ structured information to text.
- The most common types are HTML and XML, which have essentially the same structure, but different purposes.
- Markup has a "hierarchical" structure, meaning some things are inside other things. 

## What is HTML?

- HTML is used mainly for designating the types of text in web pages: titles, headers, lists, tables, where images or videos should be inserted, etc.
- Any web page you view is HTML (plus other things). Your browser (Chrome, Safari) "interprets" this HTML and decides how to display it. Try saving a web page by right-clicking > Save page as ... > HTML. Then open it in Visual Studio Code.
- A simple HTML web page:

```
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
    <head>
        <title>
            A title for this page
        </title>
    </head>
    <body>
        Some text
    </body>
</html>
```

## What is XML?

- XML has the _same structure_ as HTML, but is used as a database.

## Preview

5. Accessing & Structuring Datasets: Structure Your Data with Tables and Databases
